+++
date = '2025-07-29'
draft = false
title = 'Intro Post'
author = 'David Gussler'
+++

## Hello World

Shrikebyte is a small, independent consulting firm focused on delivering fast FPGA and SoC systems. It consists of one employee \~yours truly\~ and one very supportive wife, who this wouldn't be possible without.

I'm David Gussler, an experienced FPGA design engineer, who graduated with a degree in Electrical Engineering from Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana. I've worked for the largest of defense contractors, small bleeding-edge startups, and somewhere in-between at times throughout my career. I love chopping through bureaucracy to get difficult FPGA, embedded programming, and digital signal processing work done, and I knew that I'd be perfectly positioned to help do the same for other companies as an independent contractor. I've been fortunate enough to have a few key customers encourage me to start doing this full-time, so I took the plunge, and now here we are...

## Shrikebyte - What does it mean?

While I was musing over potential company names, I also happened to be reading a book called Hyperion Cantos, by Dan Simmons. This si-fi novel features an absolutely menacing character, the [Skrike](https://hyperioncantos.fandom.com/wiki/Shrike).

> The Shrike, also known as the Lord of Pain, Avatar, Angel of Final Atonement, Angel of Retribution or Angel of Retribution from Beyond Time, was a legendary and seemingly indestructible being of incredible power and strength, and of dauntingly imposing appearance, who was created in humanity's far future and sent back in time through the Time Tombs.

Angel of Final Atonement? Sheesh, what a title... Anyways, working with FPGAs can occasionally feel like you're on a date with the Lord of Pain, and Shrikebyte was founded to help me help others tame that beast.

## Shrikebyte - What are we all about?

Check out our [Homepage](/) for more info on our mission, philosophy, and guiding principals.

## I want to hire you for my exciting project!

You can reach me here:

[Contact information](/contact/)
